# xmachine

```
$ bin/machine testbin/echo.obj
data block: 001 000
        len: 36
        tag: 003
0000000: 0016700: 300 035
0000002: 0000020: 020 000
0000004: 0016701: 301 035
0000006: 0000016: 016 000
0000010: 0016702: 302 035
0000012: 0000016: 016 000
0000014: 0005210: 210 012
0000016: 0111112: 112 222
0000020: 0000775: 375 001
0000022: 0000000: 000 000
0000024: 0017500: 100 037
0000026: 0017502: 102 037
0000030: 0017504: 104 037
0000032: 0017506: 106 037
hheelloo  mmyy  ssoonn  wweellccoommee  ttoo  mmaaaaaacchhiinnee
```

## The goal

While away my waking hours keeping myself amused.

## What?

Oh right. Building this "thing". You'll need `gcc` and `make`.
Armed with those tools, run the following:

```
make all
```

You'll end up with a newly created `bin/` directory containing this stuff.

## Alright... now what?

With `bin/machine` and `bin/asm` now you can do some stuff. Namely, build
some machine code programs and run them with `bin/machine`.

### asm

**NOTE**
> Unless you really want to, I'd skip out on writing machine code.
> OBJ files are now supported (the TEXT portion at least) generated by MACRO-11.
> That would be the recommended approach... also, I don't have the mcode path
> in `machine` hooked up currently. So there's that.

`asm` exists to parse text files of machine code and turn them into binaries.
I could have just parsed the text files and loaded them, but I wanted an extra step.
Anywho... to build `test/mov.mcode` for example:

```
bin/asm test/mov.mcode 400 testbin/mov.bin
```

basically:

```
bin/asm <source> <program offset> <output binary>
```

The format of the input `.mcode` files is as follows:

```
<comments starting with ; (no leading spaces)>
<machine code instructions in octal (C notation, leading 0 to indicate octal): 0xxxxxx>
.end
```

The `.end` as the last line with no newline following it is necessary, because I am a lazy
man and it was the simplest way to tell the program to stop.

The format of the output file is as follows:

```
<16-bits number of program instructions>
<16-bit program offset>
<16-bit instruction 01>
...
<16-bit instruction n>
```

### machine

#### Old Way
With `testbin/mov.bin` built, now it just needs to be run by `machine`:

```
bin/machine testbin/mov.bin
```

which will run and dump its state when it halts. Something like:

```
% bin/machine testbin/jmp.bin
PSW: 0o000000
IR : 0o000000
PC : 0o000007
MAR: 0o000000
MBR: 0o000007
ALU: 0o000000
SP : 0o000000
R0 : 0o000007
R1 : 0o000000
R2 : 0o000000
R3 : 0o000000
R4 : 0o000000
0o012700 0o000007 0o000100
```

except the output of `mov.bin`, the above is `jmp.bin`.

#### New Way
Take your shiny new OBJ file generated by MACRO-11 and run:
```
bin/machine foo.obj
```

Or if you're not ready to run it, but want to see if it loaded correctly:
```
bin/machine -l foo.obj
```

### Usage

```
bin/machine <options> <obj file>

where <options> are:

-l              load obj file, dump state, and quit
-s              single step through commands
-d<disk>        use the file provided as a disk
```

**NOTE** The file must be part of the `-d` switch, like `-dfoo.img`.

### Why?

Bit operations are fun, probably because I don't get to do much of that stuff in my
working life. Something about working on simple virtual machines is fun. Probably because
(in the simple cases at least) there's not much time investment until you have a program
that does your limited bidding courtesy of a program written in its language. And finally,
getting used to octal is interesting. I know there's not much to get used to, but having
lived my life never having to think about it outside of file permissions, it's a change
from hexadecimal.

This will probably never be finished, or useful. The more I end up working on these things,
I don't think that was the goal anyway. In any case, this might morph into more of a
PDP-11 as time goes on. Right now I'm just borrowing its opcode format and some registers,
while having fun.

## References

- Michael Singer, PDP-11. Assembler Language Programming and Machine Organization, John Wiley & Sons, NY: 1980.
    - This helped me out with immediate addressing, as the Wikipedia article, while pretty
    good, is a little unclear for someone who never programmed a PDP-11 in their lifetime.